The area controlled by the Liao Dynasty. Dongdan is shaded in blue. The Dongdan Kingdom (926-936) (Dong Dan , Khitan language: Dan Gur,Qi Dan Wen dan gurBen Yi Kao  awasete[Dong Dan Guo ] noGuo Hao woLun zu Simplified Chinese: Dong Dan , Korean: dongran) was a puppet kingdom established by the Khitan to rule the realm of Balhae in Eastern Manchuria (now partially in North Eastern China).iihwayi <hangugsa iyagi 4-namgug sinrawa buggug balhae>  == History == After conquering the Dan Gur (Balhae in Khitan language) in 926, the Khitan crown prince Yelu Bei ascended to the throne of it at the Holhan fortress, the capital of Balhae, today's Mudanjiang, Heilongjiang Province. It used Dongdan as its Chinese name, which means the east Dan Gur, in respect to the West Liao dynasty.Xu Jun . Zhong Guo Gu Dai Wang Zhao He Zheng Quan Ming Hao Tan Yuan . Hu Bei Wu Chang : Hua Zhong Shi Fan Da Xue Chu Ban She . 2000Nian 11Yue : 262. . However, political tension soon evolved between Yelu Bei and his younger brother Yelu Deguang, who took the imperial throne of Khitan after their father Yelu Abaoji died, en route to his homeland from a relatively successful campaign against the Later Tang. The new emperor ordered his elder brother to move his capital from Huhan in Eastern Manchuria to Liaoyang in Western Manchuria. Bei obeyed the imperial order but soon fled to North China to avoid possible assassination in 930. Bei's son was elevated to the new king of Dongdan, but the kingdom was annexed by the Liao Dynasty in 936.Xu Jun . Zhong Guo Gu Dai Wang Zhao He Zheng Quan Ming Hao Tan Yuan . Hu Bei Wu Chang : Hua Zhong Shi Fan Da Xue Chu Ban She . 2000Nian 11Yue : 262. . A minority of historians suggest Dongdan was annexed in 982. On the other hand some beliefe that Dongdan was never a "independent kingdom", but was instantly annexed in 926 by the Khitan. To continue Balhae's friendly relations with Japan, Dongdan sent a diplomatic mission over the Sea of Japan in 929. But the Japanese court in Kyoto rejected the mission from Dongdan, due to loyalty for the old Balhae regime.The Kitai Dynasty's governance of Bohai and the structure of Dongdanguo as seen from Yelu-Yuzu's Epitaph The King of Dongdan Goes Forth (Dong Dan Wang Chu Xing Tu ), scroll, light colors on silk. 146.8 x 77.3 cm. National Palace Museum, Taipei == See also == * Emperors family tree * Liao dynasty * Northern Liao * Qara Khitai ==Notes== Category:History of Manchuria Category:History of Korea Category:Balhae Category:Former countries in Chinese history Category:History of Siberia Category:Khitan history Category:10th century in Asia Category:936 disestablishments Category:States and territories established in the 920s Category:926 establishments 
