Else Lasker-Schuler (nee Elisabeth Schuler) (; 11 February 1869 - 22 January 1945) was a German-Jewish poet and playwright famous for her bohemian lifestyle in Berlin and her unique poetic genius. She was one of the few women affiliated with the Expressionist movement. Lasker-Schuler fled Nazi Germany and lived out the rest of her life in Jerusalem.Three Plays, Else Lasker- Schuler (Archived) ==Biography== Schuler was born in Elberfeld, now a district of Wuppertal. Her mother, Jeannette Schuler (nee Kissing) was a central figure in her poetry; the main character of her play Die Wupper was inspired by her father, Aaron Schuler, a Jewish banker. Her brother Paul died when she was 13. Else was considered a child prodigy because she could read and write at the age of four. From 1880 she attended the Lyceum West an der Aue. After dropping out of school, she received private lessons at her parents' home. In 1894, Else married the physician and occasional chess player Jonathan Berthold Lasker (the elder brother of Emanuel Lasker, a World Chess Champion) and moved with him to Berlin, where she trained as an artist. On 27 July 1890 her mother died, her father followed 7 years later. On August 24, 1899, her son Paul was born and her first poems were published. She published her first full volume of poetry, Styx, three years later, in 1902. On 11 April 1903, she and Berthold Lasker divorced and on 30 November, she married Georg Lewin, artist, and founder of the Expressionist magazine Der Sturm. His pseudonym, Herwarth Walden, was her invention. L to R: Berthold Lasker, Else Lasker-Schuler, Anna Lindwurm-Lindner, and Franz Lindwurm-Lindner around 1900 Lasker-Schuler's first prose work, Das Peter-Hille-Buch, was published in 1906, after the death of Hille, one of her closest friends. In 1907, she published the prose collection Die Nachte der Tino von Bagdad, followed by the play Die Wupper in 1909, which was not performed until later. A volume of poetry called Meine Wunder, published in 1911, established Lasker-Schuler as the leading female representative of German expressionism. After separating from Herwarth Walden in 1910 and divorcing him in 1912, she found herself penniless and dependent on the financial support of her friends, in particular Karl Kraus. In 1912, she met Gottfried Benn. An intense friendship developed between them which found its literary outlet in a large number of love poems dedicated to him. In May 1922 she attended the International Congress of Progressive Artists and signed the "Founding Proclamation of the Union of Progressive International Artists". In 1927 the death of her son sent her into a deep depression. Despite winning the Kleist Prize in 1932, as a Jew she was physically harassed and threatened by the Nazis, She emigrated to Zurich but there, too, she could not work and subsequently went to the Holy Land in 1934, and finally settled in Jerusalem in 1937. In 1938 she was stripped of her German citizenship and the outbreak of World War II prevented any return to Europe. According to her first Hebrew translator, Yehuda Amihai, she lived a life of poverty and the children in the neighborhood mocked her for her eccentric dress and behavior. Lasker-Schuler dressed in an Oriental costume as her alternative persona "Prince Yussuf" She formed a literary salon called "Kraal," which Martin Buber, the philosopher, opened on January 10, 1942, at the French Cultural Center." Some leading Jewish writers and promising poets attended her literary programs, but Lasker-Schuler eventually was banned from giving readings and lectures because they were held in German. She begged the head of the German synagogue in Jerusalem to let her use his Gotteshaus (house of God) one more time: "Wherever I was, German is not allowed to be spoken. I want to arrange the last Kraal evening for a poet who is already broken, to recite from his translations [into German] of a great Hebrew" (Letter to Rabbi Kurt Wilhelm, Else Lasker-Schuler Archive, Jerusalem, cited in Bauschinger, p. 270). In her final years, Lasker-Schuler worked on her drama IchundIch (IandI), which remained a fragment. However, she finished her volume of poems, Mein Blaues Klavier (1943, My Blue Piano), printed in a limited edition of 330 copies. "[H]er literary farewell became her last attempt to overcome loneliness. Significantly, she dedicated the work to "my unforgettable friends in the cities of Germany and to those, like me, exiled and dispersed throughout the world, in good faith." In one of her final acts, she asked that her hometown of Wuppertal and its surrounding area be spared from Allied bombing." She tended to spend whatever money she had all at once which made her go for days without food or shelter. Heinz Gerling and the poet Manfred Schturmann came to her aid. Gerling opened a bank account for her and arranged for regular payments to cover her expenses whereas Schturmann edited her work and helped with her dealings with publishers. After her death Schturmann became the trustee of her legacy and during the 1950s and '60s dealt extensively with publishers in East and West Germany, Switzerland and Austria who wished to publish her works. In 1944 Lasker-Schuler's health deteriorated. She suffered a heart attack on January 16, and died in Jerusalem on January 22, 1945. She was buried on the Mount of Olives. The grave of Else Lasker- Schuler on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem The grave of Else Lasker-Schuler on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem - Hebrew inscription on grave ==Literary career == Lasker-Schuler memorial by Stephan Huber in Elberfeld, Wuppertal Lasker-Schuler left behind several volumes of poetry and three plays, as well as many short stories, essays and letters. During her lifetime, her poems were published in various magazines, among them the journal Der Sturm edited by her second husband, and Karl Kraus' literary journal Die Fackel. She also published many anthologies of poetry, some of which she illustrated herself. Examples are: * Styx (first published volume of poetry, 1902) * Der siebente Tag (second volume of poetry, 1905) * ' (first edition, 1911) * Gesammelte Gedichte (complete poetry) (1917) * ' (1943)Mein blaues Klavier (1943) Lasker- Schuler wrote her first and most important play, ', in 1908. It was published in 1909 and the first performance took place on 27 April 1919 at the Deutsches Theater in Berlin. A large part of her work is composed of love poetry, but there are also deeply religious poems and prayers. Transitions between the two are often quite fluid. Her later work is particularly rich in biblical and oriental motifs. Lasker-Schuler was very free with regard to the external rules of poetic form, however her works thereby achieve a greater inner concentration. She was also not averse to linguistic neologisms. A good example of her poetic art is her 1910 poem (lit. "An old Tibetan rug"), which was reprinted many times after its first publication in Der Sturm, the first of these being in Fackel. ==Influence== The 20th-century Scottish poet Hugh MacDiarmid included a translation of an extract from Lasker-Schuler's work in his long poem A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle, 1926. (Lines 401-410.) ==Commemoration== Angel for Jerusalem, Else Lasker-Schuler Memorial in Jerusalem Forest, April 2007 There is a memorial plaque to Else Lasker-Schuler at Motzstrasse 7, Berlin-Schoneberg, where she lived from 1924 to 1933. Part of this street was renamed Else-Lasker-Schuler-Strasse in 1996. In Elberfeld in Wuppertal there is now a school named after her (The "School without Racism"), and a memorial stele was erected on Herzogstrasse, Wuppertal. The Else-Lasker- Schuler-Society was founded 1990 in Wuppertal by journalist Hajo Jahn. In more than 20 international symposia from Breslau to Tel Aviv, the works of the poet were introduced and discussed in relation to the relevance for the presence and future. In Jerusalem, there is a small street named for Else Lasker- Schuler in the neighborhood of Nayot - Rehov Else. Perched on a ridge in the Jerusalem Forest, very close to the Kennedy Memorial (Yad Kennedy), was a sculpture in her honor resembling a slender tree trunk with wings. It was placed there in 1997, and was stolen, probably by metal thieves, in July 2007. In 2007, her final days in Jerusalem were commemorated in the BBC radio play My Blue Piano by the Scottish playwright Marty Ross (Radio 4 2007) which combined the facts of her dying days with the fantasies of her inner life.This can be heard at My Blue Piano On February 7, 2020, Google celebrated her with a Google Doodle. ==Film== * Ich raume auf ("Putting Things Straight") Germany 1979, German actress Gisela Stein plays the part of Else Lasker-Schuler fighting against her editors. The film was first broadcast by: Westdeutscher Rundfunk Koln, director: Georg Brintrup * Mein Herz - niemandem! (1997) by Helma Sanders-Brahms features Lena Stolze as the poet. It climaxes with the paradox of her deep bond with Gottfried Benn, a physician and poet who became a Nazi, and publicly supported the Nazi regime even as Lasker-Schuler was forced into exile. ==Translations into English== ===Poetry=== * Translated poems from nine poets including Lasker-Schuler. * * * * * Bilingual edition. * ===Prose=== * Translation of the novel Mein Herz. * Translation of Konzert. ===Plays=== * Translations of Die Wupper, Arthur Aronymus : die Geschichte meines Vaters, and Ich und ich: Ein nachgelassenes Schaauspiel. ==References== ==Further reading== * While there are several biographies of Lasker-Schuler in German, this volume is apparently the first book length biography written in English. * *. History of Europe in 1913; Lasker-Schuler is noted. * This book includes a short biography as well as translations and interpretations of Lasker-Schuler's poetry. * Chapter IV contains a biography of Else Lasker- Schuler. ==External links== * * ELS Gesellschaft * Online list of publications *"Ein alter Tibetteppich" - poem of the month (in German) * Elke Lasker- Schuler Collection of letters at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York, NY * * * Category:1869 births Category:1945 deaths Category:People from Elberfeld Category:Expressionist poets Category:Jewish poets Category:German women dramatists and playwrights Category:People from the Rhine Province Category:People from Jerusalem Category:Kleist Prize winners Category:Burials at the Jewish cemetery on the Mount of Olives Category:20th-century German dramatists and playwrights Category:20th-century German poets Category:20th- century German women writers Category:German women poets Category:Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to Mandatory Palestine Category:Ashkenazi Jews 
