{| |} Nivose is a () of the French Navy. The frigate is the third ship of the class and the fourth French vessel named after the fourth month of the Republican Calendar. Nivose was constructed by Chantiers de l'Atlantique at Saint-Nazaire, France in 1991 and entered service in 1992. The frigate is stationed in the French Pacific territories for patrol duties. ==Design and description== The s were designed in response to a demand for a cheap warship capable of operating in low threat areas and able to perform general patrol functions. As a result, the Floreal class were constructed to mercantile standards in the areas of ammunition stowage, helicopter facilities and damage control, which significantly lowered the cost of the vessels. The Floreal class were designed for using modular construction which shortened their building times. Nivose has a standard displacement of and at full load. The frigate measures long between perpendiculars and overall with a beam of and a draught of . Due to the frigate's broad beam, the ship is equipped with fin stabilisers. The frigate is powered by a combined diesel and diesel (CODAD) system comprising four SEMT Pielstick 6 PA6 L280 BPC diesel engines driving two shafts each turning a LIPS controllable pitch propeller. The CODAD system is rated at The vessel is also equipped with one bow thruster. Due to the mercantile construction design, the four diesels are all located within one machinery room for ease of maintenance. Both diesel fuel and TR5 aviation fuel is brought aboard at a single location at the stern compared to naval- constructed vessels which sport two. The ship also has three diesel-electric generators located just fore and aft of the machinery room. Nivose has a maximum speed of and a range of at . Nivose was armed with two Exocet MM38 surface-to-surface missiles in launchers situated centrally atop the midships superstructure. However, at the end of the missile's life cycle in 2014, the launchers were removed as the French Navy did not intend to replace the capability aboard the ships. The ship also mounts one 100 mm CADAM turret with the Najir fire control system located forwards and two 20 mm modele F2 guns situated in atop the aft superstructure. The ship is equipped with DRBV-21C (Mars) air sentry, Racal Decca RM1290 navigation and Racal Decca RM1290 landing radars along with ARBG-1A Saigon communications intercept, CSF ARBR 16A radar intercept electronic surveillance systems and two Dagaie decoy systems. Panther helicopter The frigate is equipped with a helicopter landing pad located on the stern and a hangar. The ship is capable of operating the embarked Eurocopter AS565 Panther up to sea state 5. Nivose is capable of operating helicopters up to the size of the Eurocopter AS332 Super Puma. The ship has a complement of 90 including the aircrew and officers and 24 marines with capacity for a further 13 personnel. == Construction and career == Nivose was ordered as part of the second pair on 9 January 1990 from Chantiers de l'Atlantique for construction at their yard in Saint-Nazaire, France and the keel was laid down on 16 January 1991. The frigate was built using modular construction methods which reduced the vessel's construction time. Nivose was launched on 10 August 1991 and commissioned into the French Navy on 16 October 1992. Following sea trials, Nivose sailed for Arsenal de Lorient, Lorient where the weapons and sensors were installed and underwent further trials. After entering service, Nivose was based at Port des Galets, Reunion to patrol France's Pacific territories. In December 2000, the frigate caught the fishing vessel Vedra illegally fishing south east of Kerguelen. After taking control of Vedra and heading for Port des Galets, the two ships came upon another vessel, Grand Prince, illegally fishing. Grand Prince was halted and boarded and all three vessels sailed for Reunion. On 27 July 2001, while sailing off the coast of Somalia, Nivose received a distress call from Diana, which was afire. The crew of Diana had abandoned ship and were in the water in heavy seas. The frigate dispatched its helicopter and the 16 crew were rescued of which 15 were transported to the cargo ship . The sixteenth crew member was taken to Nivose to receive medical treatment. In October 2001, Nivose was deployed in the Persian Gulf as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. Nivose departing Cape Town, South Africa In January 2003, Nivose intercepted and captured the fishing vessel Lince off the Kerguelen coast after it was spotted illegally fishing for toothfish. Lince, a vessel known for illegal fishing, was found to have of toothfish aboard and was taken to Port des Galets under escort by both Nivose and the patrol vessel . In March 2004, the frigate was deployed in support of Madagascar after Typhoon Galifo hit the island nation. Later that year in September, Nivose with the patrol vessel , intercepted a flotilla of six Japanese fishing vessels illegally fishing in French waters. Two Japanese ships were boarded, Koryu Maru 38 and Chokyu Maru 38, and of illegally caught tuna was found in their holds. The two fishing vessels were escorted into Port des Galets. In November 2004, the frigate intercepted the Taiwanese fishing vessel Ruey Shyang 11 after it was spotted illegally fishing southwest of Reunion. In 2006, the frigate underwent a three-month long maintenance period at Dubai. In late 2008, under frigate captain Jean-Marc Le Quilliec, Nivose was deployed as part of a European Union expeditionary force, Operation Atalanta, in the Gulf of Aden to fight piracy off Somalia. On 12 April 2009, Nivose relieved her sister ship as part the operation. On 15 April 2009, she captured eleven pirates east of Mombasa, and thwarted an attack on the Liberian-registered merchantman . On 3 May 2009, 900 km off Somalia, the crew managed to lure pirates to attack the ship by sailing into the sun to avoid being identified and mistaken for a merchant vessel; as the pirates closed in, Nivose turned about and launched a helicopter and fast outboard vessels. Eleven pirates were captured. From 5 to 7 March 2010, joining mission forces from France, Italy, Luxembourg, Spain and Sweden, Nivose intercepted four mother ships and arrested 35 pirates in three days off Somalia. The frigate sank two of the mother ships. On 29 March 2014, Nivose intercepted five fishing vessels illegally fishing off Juan de Nova Island. During the night of 29/30 September 2014, Nivose was severely damaged by a fire off Reunion which broke out in the engine room. Floreal assisted in firefighting operations. The ship was disabled and Nivose was towed first by Floreal and then by the tugboat Bougainville into Port des Galets. The frigate was taken to Mauritius to undergo repairs. The ship returned to service after nearly 13 months in November 2015. In March 2019, the frigate and the amphibious assault ship were sent to Mozambique as part of France's response for humanitarian aid after Typhoon Idai hit the nation. On 25 September 2019, Nivose intercepted a dhow in the Indian Ocean. During the search of the vessel, of cannabis resin was found and seized. ==Citations== ==References== * * * Category:Floreal-class frigates Category:1991 ships Category:Ships built in France Category:Maritime incidents in 2014 
