Mahammad bin Suleyman (Classical Azerbaijani: ), better known by his pen name Fuzuli ( ; - 1556), was an Azerbaijani,Encyclopaedia Iranica. G. Doerfer. Azeri TurkishEncyclopaedia Iranica. H. Javadi and K. Burill. Azeri LiteratureA. M. A Shushtery. Outlines of Islamic Culture - Volume I: Historical and Cultural Aspects. READ BOOKS, 2007. , p. 130 of the Bayat tribes of Oghuz,Muhammed FuzuliBritannica onlineKathleen R. F. Burrill, The Quatrains of Nesimi, Fourteenth-century Turkic Hurufi, Mouton, 1973, poet, writer and thinker. Often considered one of the greatest contributors to the divan tradition of Azerbaijani literature,"Fuzuli, Mehmed bin Suleyman" in Encyclopaedia Britannica Fuzuli in fact wrote his collected poems (divan) in three different languages: in his native Azerbaijani, Arabic and Persian.Peter Rollberg. The modern encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet literature (including Non-Russian and Emigre literatures) / Edited by Harry B. Weber. -- Academic International Press, 1987. -- Volume 8. -- Page 76. In Mesopotamia Fuzuli was in intimate contact with three cultures -- Turkic, Arabic, and Persian. Besides his native Azeri, he learned Arabic and Persian at an early age and acquired a through command of the literatures in all three languages, an accomplishment in which the cosmopolitan literary and scholarly circles of Hilla played an important role. He was well-versed in both the Ottoman and Chagatai Turkic literary traditions as well as mathematics and astronomy."Fozuli, Mohammad b. Solayman" in Encyclopaedia Iranica ==Life== Fuzuli is generally believed to have been born around 1480 in what is now Iraq, when the area was under Ak Koyunlu Turkmen rule; he was probably born in either Karbala' or an-Najaf. He is believed to belong to Bayat tribe, one of the Turkic Oghuz tribes who were related to the Ottoman Kayi clan and were scattered throughout the Middle East, Anatolia, and the Caucasus at the time. Though Fuzuli's ancestors had been of nomadic origin, the family had long since settled in towns. Fuzuli appears to have received a good education, first under his father--who was a mufti in the city of Al Hillah--and then under a teacher named Rahmetullah.Senturk 281 It was during this time that he learned the Persian and Arabic languages in addition to his native Azerbaijani. Fuzuli showed poetic promise early in life, composing sometime around his twentieth year the important masnavi entitled Beng u Bade (bng w bdh; "Hashish and Wine"), in which he compared the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid II to hashish and the Safavid shah Ismail I to wine, much to the advantage of the latter. One of the few things that is known of Fuzuli's life during this time is how he arrived at his pen name. In the introduction to his collected Persian poems, he says: "In the early days when I was just beginning to write poetry, every few days I would set my heart on a particular pen name and then after a time change it for another because someone showed up who shared the same name".Quoted in Andrews, 236. Eventually, he decided upon the Arabic word fuzuli--which literally means "impertinent, improper, unnecessary"--because he "knew that this title would not be acceptable to anyone else".Ibid. Despite the name's pejorative meaning, however, it contains a double meaning--what is called tevriyye (twryh) in Ottoman Divan poetry--as Fuzuli himself explains: "I was possessed of all the arts and sciences and found a pen name that also implies this sense since in the dictionary fuzul (l) is given as a plural of fazl (; 'learning') and has the same rhythm as 'ulum (m; 'sciences') and funun (n; 'arts')".Ibid. In 1534, the Ottoman sultan Suleyman I conquered the region of Baghdad, where Fuzuli lived, from the Safavid Empire. Fuzuli now had the chance to become a court poet under the Ottoman patronage system, and he composed a number of kasides, or panegyric poems, in praise of the sultan and members of his retinue, and as a result, he was granted a stipend. However, owing to the complexities of the Ottoman bureaucracy, this stipend never materialized. In one of his best-known works, the letter Sikayetname (shkhyt nmh; "Complaint"), Fuzuli spoke out against such bureaucracy and its attendant corruption: :slm wrdm rshwt dgldr dyw almd~lr :Selam verdim rusvet degildir deyu almadilar.Kudret 189 :I said hello, but they didn't accept as it wasn't a bribe. Though his poetry flourished during his time among the Ottomans, the loss of his stipend meant that, materially speaking, Fuzuli never became secure. In fact, most of his life was spent attending upon the Tomb of `Ali in the city of an-Najaf, south of Baghdad.Andrews 237 He died during a plague outbreak in 1556, in Karbala', either of the plague itself or of cholera. ==Works== Layla and Majnun Manuscript of the Hadiqat al-Su`ada (Garden of the Blessed) of Fuzuli, 1602-3 C.E. Brooklyn Museum. A page from the collected poems of Fuzuli Fuzuli has always been known, first and foremost, as a poet of love. It was, in fact, a characterization that he seems to have agreed with: :mndn fDwly ystmh sh`r mdH w dhm :mn `shqm hmyshh swzwm `shqnh dyr :Menden Fuzuli isteme es'ar-i medh u zem :Men asikam hemise sozum asikanedurTarlan 47 :Don't ask Fuzuli for poems of praise or rebuke :I am a lover and speak only of love Fuzuli's notion of love, however, has more in common with the Sufi idea of love as a projection of the essence of God--though Fuzuli himself seems to have belonged to no particular Sufi order--than it does with the Western idea of romantic love. This can be seen in the following lines from another poem: :`shq ymsh hr n wr  :lm br qyl w ql ymsh anjq :'Asik imis her ne var 'alem :'Ilm bir kil u kal imis ancakKudret 20 :All that is in the world is love :And knowledge is nothing but gossip The first of these lines, especially, relates to the idea of wahdat al-wujud (wHd@ lwjwd), or "unity of being", which was first formulated by Ibn al-'Arabi and which states that nothing apart from various manifestations of God exists. Here, Fuzuli uses the word "love" (`shq 'ask) rather than God in the formula, but the effect is the same. Fuzuli's most extended treatment of this idea of love is in the long poem Dastan-i Leyli vu Mecnun (dstn lyl~ w mjnwn), a mesnevi which takes as its subject the classical Middle Eastern love story of Layla and Majnun. In his version of the story, Fuzuli concentrates upon the pain of the mad lover Majnun's separation from his beloved Layla, and comes to see this pain as being of the essence of love. The ultimate value of the suffering of love, in Fuzuli's work, lies in that it helps one to approach closer to "the Real" (al-Haqq lHq), which is one of the 99 names of God in Islamic tradition. ==Selected bibliography== ===Works in Azerbaijani Turkic=== * Divan ("Collected Poems") * Beng u Bade (bng w bdh; "Hashish and Wine") * Hadikat us-Sueda (Hdyqt ls`d; "Garden of Pleasures") * Dastan-i Leyli vu Mecnun (dstn lyl~ w mjnwn; "The Epic of Layla and Majnun") * Risale-i Muammeyat (rsl yt; "Treatise on Riddles") * Sikayetname (shkhyt nmh; "Complaint") ===Works in Persian=== * Divan ("Collected Poems") * Anis ol-qalb (nys lqlb; "Friend of the Heart") * Haft Jam (hft jm; "Seven Goblets") * Rend va Zahed (rnd w zhd; "Hedonist and Ascetic") * Resale-e Muammeyat (rsl yt; "Treatise on Riddles") * Sehhat o Ma'ruz (SHt w m`rwD; "Health and Sickness") ===Works in Arabic=== * Diwan ("Collected Poems") * Matla' ul-I'tiqadi (mTl` ld; "The Birth of Faith") ===Translations into English=== * Fuzuli. Leyla and Mejnun. Translated by Sofi Huri. Introduction and notes by Alessio Bombaci. London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1970. ==Legacy== Portrait of Fuzuli by Azim Azimzade (1914). National Art Museum of Azerbaijan (Baku) According to the Encyclopaedia Iranica: In April 1959, in honour of his 400th death anniversary, Karyagin district and the Fuzuli (city) were renamed to Fuzuli.Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Azerbaijan SSR, (1961), Azerbaijan SSR, Administrative-territorial division on January 1, 1961, p. 9 A street and a square are named after him in the center of Baku, as well as streets in many other cities of Azerbaijan. Several Azerbaijani institutions are named after him, including the Institute of Manuscripts in Baku. Statue of Fuzuli in Guba In 1996 the National Bank of Azerbaijan minted a golden 100 manat and a silver 50 manat commemorative coins dedicated to the 500th anniversary of Fuzuli's life and activities.Central Bank of Azerbaijan. Commemorative coins. Coins produced within 1992-2010 : Gold and silver coins dedicated to memory of Mahammad Fuzuli. - Retrieved on 25 February 2010. ==Notes== ==References== ==Sources== Primary * Fuzuli. Fuzuli Divani: Gazel, Musammat, Mukatta' ve Ruba'i kismi. Ed. Ali Nihad Tarlan. Istanbul: Ucler Basimevi, 1950. * Fuzuli. Leyla ve Mecnun. Ed. Muhammet Nur Dogan. . Secondary * Andrews, Walter G. "Fuzuli" in Ottoman Lyric Poetry: An Anthology. pp. 235-237. . * "Fozuli, Mohammad b. Solayman". Encyclopaedia Iranica. Retrieved 25 August 2006. * "Fuzuli, Mehmed bin Suleyman." Encyclopaedia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopaedia Britannica Premium Service. 23 Aug. 2006 . * Kudret, Cevdet. Fuzuli. . * Senturk, Ahmet Atilla. "Fuzuli" in Osmanli Siiri Antolojisi. pp. 280-324. . * The investigation of the mystical similarities and differences of Fozoli's Persian and Turkish Divans against Hafez's Divan (Thesis for M.A degree Islamic Azad University of Tabriz, Iran ) By: Gholamreza Ziyaee Prof.: Ph.D: Aiyoub Koushan * A comparative adaptation of Peer in Khajeh Hafez's divan with Hakim Fozooli's Persian and Turkish divans,Article 7, Volume 6, Number 21, Autumn 2012, Page 159-188 Document Type: Research Paper Authors: 1Aiyoub Koushan; 2Gholamreza Zyaee 1Faculty member, Department of Persian Literature, Tabriz Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tabriz, Iran 2Student, Department of Persian Literature, Tabriz Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tabriz, Iran. ==External links== * Fuzuli, on archive.org * Muhammed Fuzuli--a website with a brief biography and translated selections from Leyla and Mecnun * FUZULI * Fuzuli in Stanford J. Shaw's History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey Category:1494 births Category:1556 deaths Category:16th-century Azerbaijani people Category:16th- century writers of the Ottoman Empire Category:16th-century poets of the Ottoman Empire Category:Ottoman Arabic poets Category:Azerbaijani-language poets Category:Azerbaijani poets Category:Iraqi calligraphers Category:Divan poets of the Ottoman Empire Category:Ottoman literature Category:Iraqi artists Category:Iraqi Shia Muslims Category:Turkish people of Azerbaijani descent Category:Turks of the Ottoman Empire Category:Male poets of the Ottoman Empire Category:Persian-language poets Category:16th-century Arabic poets Category:Persian poets Category:15th-century Arabic poets Category:Iraqi multilingual poets 
