The Grand Theatre de Quebec is a performing arts complex in Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. It was conceived to commemorate the Canadian Centennial of 1967 and the Quebec Conference, 1864, one of the key meetings leading to the Canadian Confederation of 1867. Designed by Polish-Canadian architect Victor Prus, construction began in 1966 under Premier Jean Lesage but was stopped by the Union Nationale government of Daniel Johnson. Construction resumed in late 1967 but the theatre was not officially opened until January 16, 1971. The theatre has two venues: *Salle Louis Frechette, with 1875 seats, is named after the 19th-century French-Canadian writer Louis-Honore Frechette. *Salle Octave Cremazie, with 506 seats, is named after the 19th-century Canadian poet, Octave Cremazie, who was known as "the father of French-Canadian poetry". Since October 1972, the Conservatoire de musique du Quebec a Quebec has been located in the Grand Theatre's complex. In 1991, the theatre complex housed 49 classrooms, 70 teaching and practice studios, and a multi-media centre with a recording studio and electroacoustic lab. The complex is also home to a library which in 1991 included more than 60,000 documents of books, scores, monographs, periodicals, and recordings in various media formats. The theatre was used for the 1985 Shamrock Summit when Prime Minister Brian Mulroney entertained U.S. President Ronald Reagan. Organizations which use the theatre include the Orchestre symphonique de Quebec, the Theatre du Trident, and the Opera de Quebec. The Quebec City Summer Festival often hosts events in the theatre. ==References== ==External links== * * Category:Performing arts centres in Canada Category:Buildings and structures in Quebec City Category:Culture of Quebec City Category:Modernist architecture in Canada Category:Theatres in Quebec Category:Tourist attractions in Quebec City Category:Recording studios in Canada Category:Music venues in Quebec Category:Theatres completed in 1971 Category:Opera houses in Quebec 
