The Iverni ("Iwernoi" above) are one of the population groups mentioned in Ptolemy's Geography. The Iverni (, ') were a people of early Ireland first mentioned in Ptolemy's 2nd century Geography as living in the extreme south- west of the island.Ptolemy. Geography. 2.2.6 (ed. K. Muller [Paris 1883-1901]) He also locates a "city" called Ivernis (, ') in their territory, and observes that this settlement has the same name as the island as a whole, Ivernia (, ').Ptol. Geog. 2.2.9; 8.3.4 The name Iverni has been derived from Proto-Indo- European *, "the fertile land". It was probably once the name given to all the peoples of Ireland, but by Ptolemy's time had a more restricted usage applicable to the inhabitants of the south-west.John T. Koch, Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia, ABC-CLIO, 2005, p.709 These Iverni can be identified linguistically with the Erainn (Eraind, Ernai, Erna), a people attested in Munster and elsewhere in the early Middle Ages. The prehistoric Erainn royal dynasties are sometimes referred to as the Dairine.DIL Letter: D1 (D-Degoir), Columns 35 and 36O'Rahilly, pp. 7, 189 ==Historical septs== In early Irish genealogical tracts the Erainn are regarded as an ethnic group, distinct from the Laigin and Cruthin. Population groups in Munster classed as Erainn include the Corcu Loigde in southwest County Cork, the Muscraige in Counties Cork and Tipperary, the Corcu Duibne in County Kerry, and the Corcu Baiscinn in west County Clare. The Dal Riata and Dal Fiatach (or Ulaid) in Ulster are also considered Erainn. The Erainn appear to have been a powerful group in the proto-historic period, but in early historical times were largely reduced to politically marginal status, with the notable exception of the enigmatic Osraige. The most important of the Munster Erainn, the Corcu Loigde, retained some measure of prestige even after they had become marginalised by the Eoganachta in the 7th or 8th century.Charles Doherty, "Erainn", in Sean Duffy (ed.), Medieval Ireland: an encyclopedia, 2005, CRC Press, pp. 156-157 It is likely that the sometimes powerful Ui Liathain and their close kin the Ui Fidgenti originally belonged to the Erainn/Dairine as well, but were later counted among the Eoganachta for political reasons.John V. Kelleher, "The Rise of the Dal Cais", in Etienne Rynne (ed.), North Munster Studies: Essays in Commemoration of Monsignor Michael Moloney. Limerick: Thomond Archaeological Society. 1967. pp. 230-41.Gearoid Mac Niocaill, Ireland before the Vikings. Dublin: Gill and Macmillan. 1972. Another prominent Erainn people of early Munster are believed to have been the Mairtine, who by the early historical period have completely vanished from the Irish landscape, although they may be in part ancestral to the later Deisi Tuisceart and Dal gCais.Daibhi O Croinin, "Ireland, 400-800", in Daibhi O Croinin (ed.), A New History of Ireland (Volume 1): Prehistoric and Early Ireland. Oxford University Press. 2005. p. 222 The Deisi Muman may also have had Erainn origins, but this has long been disputed. ==Daire: Darini, Dairine== It seems likely the Iverni were related to the Darini of eastern Ulster.for extensive discussion, see Julius Pokorny. "Beitrage zur altesten Geschichte Irlands (3. Erainn, Dari(n)ne und die Iverni und Darini des Ptolomaus)", in Zeitschrift fur celtische Philologie 12 (1918): 323-57. The name "Darini" implies descent from an ancestor called Daire, (*Darios) as claimed by several historical peoples identified as Erainn, including the Dal Riata and Dal Fiatach in eastern UlsterDonnchadh O Corrain, "Prehistoric and Early Christian Ireland", in R. F. Foster (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Ireland, Oxford University Press, 2001 as well as the Erainn of Munster. An early name for Dundrum, County Down, is recorded as Dun Droma Dairine, and the name Dairine was applied to the Corcu Loigde, further suggesting a relationship between the Darini and the Iverni. ==Erainn: Clanna Dedad== The genealogies trace the descent of the Erainn from two separate eponymous ancestors, Ailill Erann and Iar mac Dedad. Legendary relatives of the latter include the Cland Dedad (offspring of Deda mac Sin), a Munster people who appear in the Ulster Cycle, led by Cu Roi, son of Daire mac Dedad, and the legendary High King Conaire Mor, grandson of Iar and ancestor of the Sil Conairi. The historical sept of the Ui Maicc Iair ("grandsons of the son of Iar") and the MAQI IARI of ogham inscriptions also appear to be related.Eoin MacNeill, "Early Irish Population Groups: their nomenclature, classification and chronology", Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy (C) 29, 1911, pp. 59-114 The personal name Iar is simply another variant of the root present in Iverni and Erainn.MacNeill 1911 Finally, the name Ith, given in the genealogies as the ultimate ancestor of the Corcu Loigde (Dairine) and offering some confusion about their parentage and relation to the Iverni, in fact preserves the same Indo-European root *peiH- ("to be fat, swell"),John T. Koch. "Eriu", in John T. Koch (ed.). Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. 2006. pp. 709-18 thus in effect completing a basic picture of the Iverni/Erainn and their kindred in later historical Ireland. ==O'Rahilly's theory== Ivernic is a hypothetical language proposed by T. F. O'Rahilly. He suggested that it was an unattested P-Celtic (probably Brittonic) language spoken in Ireland before Irish. He suggested this language was spoken by the Iverni (hence its modern name), and that they invaded Ireland from Britain, bringing with them the language. O'Rahilly identifies two words recorded in the Sanas Cormaic as coming from Ivernic: ond = "stone" and fern = "anything good". His theory has been refuted and is not widely accepted by experts.Koch, John T. Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO, 2006. p.750Martin Ball and James Fife. The Celtic Languages. Psychology Press, 1993. p.75MacEoin, Gearoid. "What language was spoken in Ireland before Irish?", in The Celtic Languages in Contact. Potsdam University Press, 2007. p.116 Furthermore, by the proto-historic period, the Iverni were evidently Goidelic-speaking, as ogham inscriptions in Primitive Irish are most abundant in Counties Cork and Kerry.John T. Koch, "Eriu, Alba and Letha: When was a Language Ancestral to Gaelic First Spoken in Ireland?", Emania 9, 1991, pp. 17-27 ==See also== *History of Ireland (400-800) *List of Irish kingdoms *List of Celtic tribes *Mac Con ==References== ===Bibliography=== * * *J.-J. Tierney, The Greek geographic tradition and Ptolemy's evidence for Irish geography, in RIA Proc., Ixxxvi (1976) sect.C, pp. 257-265 *Theodore William Moody, A New History of Ireland, p. 140, Oxford University Press, 1976 *Nora Kershaw Chadwick, The Celts, Pelican Books, 1970 *C. Thomas Cairney, Clans and Families of Ireland and Scotland, An Ethnography of the Gael, AD 500 - 1750, McFarland & Company Inc, Publishers *T. F. O'Rahilly, Irish Dialects, Past and Present, 1932 * T. F. O'Rahilly, The Goidals and Their Predecessors, London, The British Academy, 1935 * C. F. C. Hawkes, Pytheas: Europe and the Greek Explorers, Oxford University Press, 1977 * John Haywood, Atlas historique des Celtes, trad. Colette Stevanovitch, editions Autrement, coll. Atlas/Memoires, Paris, 2002, . * Byrne, Francis John, Irish Kings and High-Kings. Batsford, London, 1973 * Duffy, Sean (ed.), Atlas of Irish History. Gill & Macmillan, Dublin, 2nd edn, 2000 * Nora Chadwick, The Celts, Pelican Books, 1971 * C. Thomas. Cairney, Clans and Families of Ireland and Scotland - An Ethnography of the Gael AD 500-1750, Willow Bend Books, 1989. * Richard Bradley The Prehistory of Britain and Ireland, Cambridge University Press, 2007, , * T. M. Charles-Edwards, Early Christian Ireland, Cambridge University Press, 2000, , * Barry Raftery, Pagan Celtic Ireland: The Enigma of the Irish Iron Age, Thames and Hudson, 1998 * Lloyd Robert Laing, The Archaeology of Celtic Britain and Ireland, C. AD 400-1200: C. AD 400 - 1200, Cambridge University Press, 2006 Category:Prehistoric Ireland Category:Gaelic-Irish nations and dynasties Category:Tribes of ancient Ireland Category:History of County Cork Category:Medieval Ireland Category:Extinct Celtic languages 
