Jaime Hernando Garzon Forero (October 24, 1960 - August 13, 1999 in Bogota) was a Colombian comedian, journalist, politician, and peace activist. He was popular on colombian television during the 1990s for his unique political satire. In addition to his work on television, he also had roles as a peace negotiator in the release of FARC guerrillas' hostages. He was murdered in 1999 by right-wing paramilitary hitmen, with suspected support from members of the Colombian military and security services, according to testimonies of former paramilitaries commanders. The case remains open and unsolved. == Life == Jaime Garzon was born in Bogota on October 24, 1960. He studied law and political science at the Universidad Nacional de Colombia, but his active involvement in politics and television did not allow him to finish. Garzon was an avid fan of Millonarios FC, a football club based in his hometown of Bogota, Colombia. === Mayor of Sumapaz === Garzon joined the political campaign of Andres Pastrana Arango for mayor of Bogota. After winning the elections, Pastrana nominated him as mayor of Sumapaz, an underdeveloped rural locality in the district, in 1988. Garzon tried to improve the standard of living in Sumapaz. In a year, he created a health center, the school was improvedAs a homage, it has its name as Colegio Campestre "Jaime Garzon". and the only street of town was paved. But his originality was not well seen by the central administration of Pastrana. Asked in a telegram to notify the number of legal brothels in Sumapaz, he answered: "Despues de una inspeccion visual, informo que aqui las unicas putas, son las putas FARC", a sarcastic answer typical of his sense of black humor, roughly translated as "After a visual inspection, I report that the only whores around here are the fucking FARC", a wordplay, as in Colombian Spanish the word 'putas' could mean both 'whores' as noun, and 'fucking' as an intensifier adjective. That answer and other eccentricities, brought to the conclusion by the central administration that he had founded a brothel in Sumapaz. The municipal government secretary, Volmar Perez Ortiz, signed his destitution. For this reason, Garzon sued Pastrana's administration; the case was ruled in his favor only in 1997. Between 1990 and 1994 he worked at the Narino House during the presidency of Cesar Gaviria. He helped in the translations of the new Colombian Constitution of 1991 into the indigenous languages and as a presidential adviser in communications. == Career == Jaime Garzon in a fictional characters "Heriberto de la Calle", monument installed in Bogota. In 1987, the director of the Noticiero de las 7, Antonio Morales Riveira, knew of the fame of the Mayor of Sumapaz in imitating politicians. He brought Garzon to the newscast; it was the first time he would appear on television. He worked on various television parodies, becoming famous with the TV show Zoociedad (Zoociety) in the 1990s which contained humor about materialistic society and politics. Garzon then started working on a program called "!Quac! El Noticero", collaborating with actor Diego Leon Hoyos until 1997. Garzon created many instantly recognizable fictional characters. One of them was "Heriberto de la Calle". Heriberto was a shoe shiner who interviewed different personalities, including politicians. {| border="1" cellpadding="4" cellspacing="0" style="margin: 1em 1em 1em 0; background: #f9f9f9; border: 1px #aaa solid; border-collapse: collapse; font- size: 90%;" |- bgcolor="#B0C4DE" align="center" ! Year || Program || Character || Producer and channel |- |1990-1993||Zoociedad||Emerson de Francisco con Elvia Lucia Davila ||Producciones Cinevision: Cadena Uno and Cadena Dos |- |1995-1997||!Quac! El noticero|| With Diego Leon Hoyos as Maria Leona Santodomingo: Nestor Eli, Inti de la Hoz, 'comrad' Jhon Lenin, 'reporter' Wiliam Garra, Godofredo Cinico Caspa||RTI: Cadena Uno |- |1997||La Lechuza||Heriberto de la Calle||Caracol Radio |- |} == Peace activist == On March 23, 1998, 200 FARC guerrillas kidnapped 32 persons on the Villavicencio - Bogota road. Among the hostages were four US citizens and an Italian. On March 27 a commission, with the authorization of anti-kidnapping czar Jose Alfredo Escobar and led by Garzon, allowed the release of nine of the hostages. On May 6, 1998, General Jorge Enrique Mora Rangel, commander of the Colombian Army, publicly asked Escobar to investigate Garzon for his participation in the release of the hostages. On June 4, Escobar, defended the role of Garzon in the release of the hostages as a humanitarian mission. Garzon tried to have an appointment with General Mora Rangel, but he was not accepted. The journalist sent a telegram to the military where he said: "General, do not look for enemies among the Colombians that risk their life everyday to build a proud nation as I want and as you are fighting for." In May 1999 Garzon said in a cocktail party in front of some personalities, among them the US Ambassador, that General Mora was accusing him of being a collaborator of the FARC. On May 25, 1999, Senator Piedad Cordoba was kidnapped by the paramilitary group of Carlos Castano, and she was accused by him of being a collaborator of the guerrilla. According to Senator Cordoba, Castano also mentioned Garzon. Once she was released, she met the journalist and warned him of the danger. The participation in the process of the FARC's hostage releases and the intention to promote a dialogue of peace brought him many threats, but the most noticeable were those from Castano. == Murder == On Tuesday, August 10, 1999, Garzon visited the paramilitary leader Angel Gaitan Mahecha, who was in the Modelo Prison in Bogota with the intention to arrange a meeting with Carlos Castano. The meeting was to be held on August 14 in the Cordoba Department. On Wednesday, August 11, Garzon said to his wife and a makeup artist that he was going to be killed the next day. On Friday, August 13, at 5:45, local time, Garzon was approaching the Radionet station in his gray Jeep Cherokee. When he was turning toward the south coming from 26th Street in the Barrio Quinta Paredes sector, in front of Corferias, two men riding a high velocity white motorcycle with hidden plates approached the car and called his name, then shot him five times. He was 38 years old. The word quickly spread as his own colleagues at Radionet were the first to give the news to Colombia. Hundreds of people went out into the streets. The vehicular traffic worsened when a pedestrian bridge fell onto the North Highway, near 122nd Street, because a group of people thought wrongly that the funeral would pass by the site. Three people died and 30 were injured. On that Friday night, sports presenter Cesar Augusto Londono for Noticiero CM& had to introduce a memorial note to Heriberto de la Calle, one of the characters of his murdered companion. He introduced the note saying: "that's all for sports ... f***king country!".https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-5cPRSY0_8 == Investigation == According to Judge Julio Roberto Ballen Silva, the AUC reacted against his involvement in negotiations for the release of guerrilla-held hostages on behalf of their family members. There are several versions of what happened in the days preceding his murder. In one of them Garzon was informed of an order to assassinate him; he then contacted Castano, who scheduled a meeting with him to take place just the day after his murder and sent a counter order to abort the assassination. The order apparently either never reached the actual killers, or came after it was too late. This led some to speculate that the meeting was a trap. An investigation conducted by the TV program Contravia directed by Holman Morris provides evidence of the participation of agents of the Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (DAS, the then state intelligence agency) in employing false witnesses to cause the investigation turn away from the real events. Likewise, the paramilitary leader Freddy Rendon Herrera aka "El Aleman" accused members of the military forces of being intellectual authors of the murder. === Castano is accused of being the mastermind of the crime === On September 13, 1999, the authorities reacted promptly to guarantee the arrest of the assassins of the journalist. Four people participated in the first investigations as key witnesses of the crime: Maria Amparo Arroyave Mantilla, Wilson Llano Caballero alias El Profe, Maribel Perez Jimenez and Wilson Raul Ramirez Munoz. Although the time of the crime was too early and Maria Amparo Arroyave was on the 4th floor of a building (located 100 meters from the place of the assassination) and the two hitmen were wearing helmets, she was able to give a detailed description of one of the assassins' face and clothing. On August 19, 1999, as an answer to the suggestion of a journalist, who had said that the responsibility for the crime of Garzon fell on the military superiors, the Minister of Defense, Luis Fernando Ramirez, along with several commanders of the National Army, made a public declaration. In it, they announced that such suggestion was defamatory and that they rejected and condemned the crime of one of the best journalists of the end of the century, the best humorist and the sharpest critic of the Colombian society of the last decades. On January 6, 2000, the Police of Medellin arrested Juan Pablo Ortiz Agudelo, alias Bochas, who, according to the Administrative Department of Security, was the assassin that shot Garzon and was recognized by Maria Amparo Arroyave. On April 24 Carlos Castano, top leader of the AUC, was formally accused of being the mastermind of the crime. On June 6 he was declared absent defendant. On September 24, 2001, the Police arrested Edilberto Antonio Sierra Ayala in Belen de Umbria under the accusation of being the other criminal who had driven the motorbike. On January 3, 2002, the tribunal made the closure of the process official. Therefore, a request of the civil part to review the case was ignored by the tribunal. === Complaints of manipulation of the investigation === On January 21, 2000, the Attorney General was the first entity to cast doubt on the veracity of Maria Teresa Arroya Montoya's testimony. The Attorney then ordered a careful inspection of the place from which she claimed that she saw the crime. According to lawyer Alirio Uribe Munoz, the Attorney concluded that observing the details of the assassins from the place she claimed that she saw the crime was impossible. Furthermore, the Attorney found several contradictions in her description and a few coincidences with other witnesses's, who happened to be nearer to the place of the crime; none of them could remember the assassins' faces, because they were very fast. Nevertheless, none of these inconsistencies had been reviewed in the record. Arroyave Montoya then disappeared and then was contacted by the DAS agent Juan Angel Ramirez Garcia, whom Attorney General Office did not allow his investigation. In October 2002, Reporters Without Borders and Red Damocles also questioned the veracity of Wilson Llano Caballero's testimony, who also was considered to be a key witness during the first investigation and was presented as a DAS Informant: He provided pictures and information about the alleged murderers, alias "Bochas" and "Tono", and convinced his girlfriend, Maribel Perez Jimenez, and his neighbour, Wilson Raul Ramirez, to declare against the two suspects. === Confessions of paramilitary leaders === On March 11, 2004, Judge Julio Roberto Ballen Silva then acquitted the two alleged assassins of the journalist. The sentence allowed opening an investigation into the agents, officials and false witnesses of the first process. The tribunal concluded once more that Carlos Castano was the mastermind of the crime, therefore Castano was sentenced to 38 years in prison and fined 790 million pesos. However, in April of that very year, Castano was killed probably by disputes among the same paramilitary members. On May 9, 2008, the former Paramilitary leader Diego Fernando Murillo alias Don Berna, said that members of the criminal gang La Terraza of Medellin, that served Carlos Castano, were the assassins of Garzon. In June 2008, paramilitary leader Jorge Ivan Laverde, alias El Iguano, declared before Law of Justice and Peace that the former sub-director of the DAS, Jose Miguel Narvaez, instigated Carlos Castano to kill Jaime Garzon. A month later, in July, another paramilitary former member, Ever Veloza Garcia alias HH, gave a USB drive that belonged to Carlos Castano to the Attorney General and said that the USB contained evidence that Castano ordered La Terraza gang to assassinate Jaime Garzon. Furthermore, Veloza said that Castano had said, at several occasions, that the crime of Garzon was a mistake and that "it was carried out to do some friends of the National Army a favor ". In October 2009 former paramilitary leader Freddy Rendon Herrera, alias "El Aleman", said to Justice and Peace process that Carlos Castano had ordered the assassination of the journalist under "specific request of senior military leaders of the time". == Popular culture == Garzon is portrayed by the Colombian actor Jose Manuel Ospina as the character of 'Jairo Garcia' in TV Series Tres Caines. == References == === Notes === == External links == * Carlos Castano Gil convicted for murder of journalist Jaime Garzon - IFEX *Cuatro anos sin Jaime Garzon - Un Adios de Carnaval | Revista Numero Uno * Edificio Colombia. Blog with Garzon's Tv appearances. * * * Memorial for Garzon on Bogota's Plaza Bolivar Category:Colombian male comedians Category:1960 births Category:1999 deaths Category:Assassinated Colombian journalists Category:People murdered in Colombia Category:Colombian pacifists Category:20th-century comedians 
