Jiri Grygar (2006) Jiri Grygar (; March 17, 1936, in Heinersdorf, Germany, now Dziewietlice, Poland) is a Czech astronomer, popularizer of science and Kalinga Prize (1996) laureate. == Career == After studying physics at the Masaryk University in Brno and astronomy at the Charles University in Prague he joined the Astronomical Institute of the Academy of Sciences, Department of Stellar Astronomy in Ondrejov. Twenty years later he moved to the Institute of Physics, Low Temperature Physics Department at Rez, where he remained for more than ten years. Shortly after the Velvet Revolution he joined the High Energy Physics Department at the same institution. From 1992 to 1998, Grygar chaired the Czech Astronomical Society. He also chaired the Czech Television Council and the Science and Philosophy section of the European Culture Club. He is member of editorial boards of the periodicals Rise hvezd, Vesmir, Universum and Omega. Grygar holds a PhD in astrophysics. His papers focus on interplanetary matter (meteors, comets), limb darkening in stellar atmospheres, close binaries, novae, chemically peculiar stars and remote sensing. Between 2004-2008, Grygar was the President of the Learned Society of the Czech Republic, an association of the leading scholars in the country.The Learned Society of the Czech Republic == Public appearances == Grygar is well-known to the public in the Czech Republic and Slovakia due to his TV series about the Universe - Okna vesmiru dokoran ("Wide open windows of the Universe"; 1982-1990). As a member of the Cesky klub skeptiku Sisyfos scientific skeptic group,Sisyfos Czech Republic he is also a prominent critic of pseudoscience and other unproven theories. A practising Catholic, he is also a well-known writer on the topic of the relationship between religion and science.Jiri Grygar - Faith and Science == Honors == On October 26, 1976, a main-belt asteroid 3336 was discovered by a Czech astronomer Lubos Kohoutek, who named it after Dr. Grygar. In 2009, Dr. Grygar was awarded one of the most prestigious Czech scientific awards, Ceska hlava.Astrofyzik Jiri Grygar odmitl cenu Ceska hlava, Cesky rozhlas, 16 November 2009 In 2010, he was the inaugural recipient of the respectable Mensa Czech Republic Award.RNDr. Jiri Grygar, CSc. prevzal Cestne uznani Mensy Ceske republiky Dr. Grygar is a recipient of a number of other awards.Jiri Grygar curriculum vitae == External links == * Short biography incl. contact information == References == Category:1936 births Category:Living people Category:Czech astronomers Category:Czech Roman Catholics Category:Masaryk University alumni Category:Charles University alumni Category:Czech skeptics Category:People from Nysa County 
