Jose Carlos Mariategui La Chira (14 June 1894 - 16 April 1930) was a Peruvian intellectual, journalist, activist and political philosopher. A prolific writer before his early death at the age of 35, he is considered one of the most influential Latin American socialists of the 20th century. Mariategui's Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality (1928) is still widely read in South America, and called "one of the broadest, deepest, and most enduring works of the Latin American century".Enrique Krauze, "Jose Carlos Mariategui: Indigenous Marxism" in Redeemers: Ideas and Power in Latin America. Translated by Hank Heifetz and Natasha Wimmer. New York: HarperCollins 2011, p. 89. An avowed self-taught Marxist, he insisted that a socialist revolution should evolve organically in Latin America based on local conditions and practices, not the result of mechanically applying a European formula. Although best known as a political thinker, his literary writings have gained attention by scholars.Eugenio Chang-Rodriguez, "Jose Carlos Mariategui" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, vol. 3, p. 523. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons 1996. == Life and works == One of three children, Jose Carlos Mariategui was born in Moquegua, although his pious Catholic mother, Maria Amalia La Chira Ballejos, led him to believe he was born in Lima.Krauze, "Mariategui", p. 90. His father, Francisco Javier Mariategui Requejo, abandoned his family when Jose Carlos was young. To support her children, Jose Carlos' mother, moved first to Lima, then to Huacho, where she had more relatives who helped her make a living. Jose Carlos had a brother and a sister: Julio Cesar and Guillermina. In 1902, as a young schoolboy, he badly injured his left leg in an accident and was moved to a hospital in Lima. Despite a four-year-long convalescence, his leg remained fragile and he was unable to continue his studies. This was the first of a series of health problems that plagued him throughout his life. Although he was unable to continue formal schooling, Mariategui read widely and taught himself French.Krauze, "Mariategui", p. 91. Though he hoped to become a Roman Catholic priest, at the age of fourteen he started working at a newspaper, first as an errand boy, then as a linotypist, then eventually as a writer. The linotypist he assisted, Juan Manuel Campos, introduced him to an anarchist intellectual, Manuel Gonzalez Prada. Gonzalez Prada had made a name for himself in a denunciation of the corruption and incompetence of Peru's rulers, and especially the condition of Peruvian peasants due to the monopolization of land by a small group of gamonales (landowners), an analysis that influenced Mariategui's later writings.Krauze, "Mariategui", p. 92. Mariategui worked in daily journalism for La Prensa and also for the magazine Mundo Limeno. In 1916, he left his first employer to join a new daily, El Tiempo, which had a more leftist orientation. Two years later he launched his magazine, only to find that the owners of El Tiempo refused to print it. This led him to break with El Tiempo and launch a newspaper called La Razon, which became his first major venture in left-wing journalism. In 1918, "nauseated by Creole politics," he wrote in an autobiographical note, "I turned resolutely toward socialism". The newspaper led by Mariategui waged a vigorous defense of the campaign then underway for reform of the universities and went on to become a tribunal for the defense of the young labor movement. La Razon supported a strike for the eight-hour day held in May 1919, along with lowering the cost of subsistence goods. The paper's aggressive radicalism brought it into conflict with the Leguia government, and it was rumored that the ruling circles gave Mariategui a choice: exile or jail.Krauze, "Mariategui" p. 97. In any event, Mariategui left for Europe in 1920, traveling through France, Germany, Austria and eventually living in Italy for two years. In France, he met with Georges Sorel. He was rather taken with the voluntarist, unorthodox Marxism of Sorel, which he saw the qualities of in the rise of Lenin and the Bolsheviks. During his time in Italy, he married an Italian woman, Anna Chiappe,Chang-Rodriguez, "Jose Carlos Mariategui" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, vol. 3, p. 522. with whom he had four children. He was in Italy during the Turin factory occupations of 1920, and in January 1921 he was present at the Livorno Congress of the Italian Socialist Party, where the historic split occurred that led to the formation of the Communist Party. By the time he left the country in 1922, Benito Mussolini was already on his way to power. In his writings from that period, Mariategui observed that fascism was a response to deep social crisis, that it based itself on the petty bourgeoisie of town and country, and that it relied heavily on a cult of violence. According to him, fascism was the price that a society in crisis paid for the failures of the left. Upon his return to Peru in 1923, he began giving in lectures to the Student Federation in the People's University and writing articles about the European situation. He also began using Marxist methods to study Peru. Mariategui also came into contact with and allied himself with Victor Raul Haya de la Torre, leader of the populist movement American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA). In October 1923, Haya de la Torre was deported by the Leguia government, leaving Mariategui as the editor of the magazine Claridad. The fifth issue of the publication in March 1924 was dedicated to Vladimir Lenin. September 1926 cover of Amauta In 1924, Mariategui nearly died, and his injured leg had to be amputated. In 1926, he established the journal Amauta to serve as a forum for discussions of socialism, art, and culture in Peru and all of Latin America. In 1927, he was arrested and confined to a military hospital, and later subject to house arrest. He briefly considered relocating to Montevideo or Buenos Aires. In 1928, Mariategui became alienated from the APRA, and he set about establishing the Socialist Party, which formally constituted in October of that year, with Mariategui as general secretary (it later became the Communist Party of Peru). That year, he published his best-known work, Seven Interpretative Essays on Peruvian Reality, in which he examined Peru's social and economic situation from a Marxist perspective. It was considered one of the first materialist analyses of a Latin American society. Beginning with the country's economic history, the book proceeds to a discussion of the "Indian problem", which Mariategui locates firmly within the "land problem". Other essays are devoted to public education, religion, regionalism and centralism, and literature. Also in the same work, Mariategui blamed the latifundistas, or large land- owners, for the stilted economy of the country and the miserable conditions of the indigenous peoples in the region. He observed that Peru at the time had many characteristics of a feudal society. He argued that a transition to socialism should be based on traditional forms of collectivism as practiced by the Indians. In a famous phrase, Mariategui stated "the communitarianism of the Incas cannot be denied or disparaged for having evolved under an autocratic regime." In 1929, Mariategui participated in the establishment of the General Confederation of Peruvian Workers (CGTP), which then sent a delegate to Montevideo for the Constituent Congress of the Latin American Trade Union Conference. Mariategui died on April 16, 1930, in Lima of complications from his earlier affliction. His house at Jiron Washington in the center of Lima was later turned into a museum. == Influence == In different ways, organizations like Shining Path, and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, and the Peruvian Communist Party all look towards Mariategui and his writings. Mariategui's ideas have recently seen a major revival due to the rise of leftist governments all over South America, in particular in Bolivia was in 2005 Evo Morales became that country's first-ever indigenous president since the Conquest 500 years earlier (second in Latin America following Mexico's Benito Juarez). The rise of popular indigenous movements in Ecuador and Peru have also sparked a renewed interest in Mariategui's writings concerning the role of indigenous peoples in a Latin American revolution. The previous ruling party in Peru, the Peruvian Nationalist Party, claims Mariategui as one of its ideological founders. == Quotes == * Italian fascism represents, clearly, the anti-revolution or, as it is usually called, the counter-revolution. The fascist offensive is explained and is realized in Italy, as a consequence of a retreat or a defeat of the revolution. * I am self-taught. I once registered in Arts in Lima, but only in the interest of taking an erudite Augustine's Latin course. And, in Europe, I freely attended some courses, but without ever deciding to lose my extra- collegiate, and perhaps anti-collegiate, status.Jose Carlos Mariategui, Autobiographical Note. January 10, 1927. * Peru is a semi-feudal and semi- colonial country at the same time. Though this may seem like a paradox, this is a fact and has to be changed. * The fight is long and tough, but together we can make it. Mariategui is also responsible for coining the phrase, about Marxism, sendero luminoso al futuro ("the Shining Path to the future"). This phrase later became the name of the Shining Path Maoist organization in Peru as a means of differentiating them from other Communist groups (they preferred to be called the Communist Party of Peru). == Works == * The Heroic and Creative Meaning of Socialism Jose Carlos Mariategui. Selected Essays. - Edited and Translated by Michael Pearlman. 1996 Humanities Press, New Jersey * Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality by Jose Carlos Mariategui. University of Texas Press. 1997. == Further reading == * Chang-Rodriguez, Eugenio. Poetica e ideologia en Jose Mariategui. 1983. * Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne. "Indigenous Resistance in the Americas and the Legacy of Mariategui". Monthly Review vol. 61(4)2009. * Krauze, Enrique. "Jose Carlos Mariategui: Indigenous Marxism" in Redeemers: Ideas and Power in Latin America. Translated by Hank Heifetz and Natasha Wimmer. New York: HarperCollins 2011. * Vanden, Harry E. National Marxism in Latin America: Jose Carlos Mariategui's Thought and Politics. 1986. == References == == External links == * * Jose Carlos Mariategui Online Archive * Jose Carlos Mariategui Memorial Museum, Lima * Jose Carlos Mariategui Film Archive * Jose Carlos Mariategui Complete Photo Archive * Jose Carlos Mariategui Main Internet Portal * Jose Carlos Mariategui Internet Archive (articles, biography, and pictures) * "Jose Carlos Mariategui: Latin America's forgotten Marxist" an introduction to Mariategui's life and political views by Mike Gonzalez from International Socialism 115 (summer 2007) * Indigenous Resistance in the Americas and the Legacy of Mariategui by Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, Monthly Review Category:1894 births Category:1930 deaths Category:Marxist journalists Category:Peruvian sociologists Category:Marxist theorists Category:Peruvian communists Category:Mestizo writers Category:Anti-revisionists Category:Peruvian essayists Category:Peruvian male writers Category:Peruvian journalists Category:Male journalists Category:Male essayists Category:20th-century essayists Category:20th-century journalists 
